let's hear from the health secretary
matt hancock welcome back to downing
street for today's coronavirus briefing
and i'm joined by
professor jonathan van tam the deputy
chief medical officer
and dr susan hopkins the medical
director of public health england and
nhs tests and trace and before i
share some news on our vaccination
program i'd just like to update you on
the latest coronavirus data
if we can have the first slide please
the data show
that we are moving in the right
direction i think that's the third slide
if i could have the first slide that
would be
great which has the office for national
statistics data on it
um so the um
no we'll try to get the slide up but in
the meantime
what the slide shows is that the number
of cases
is now down to one in every
145 people and that the rate of decline
is continuing but actually the pace of
it
is slowing the
rate of hospital admissions
shows a fall of 40 over the past
fortnight
but there are still 15
485 people in hospital and that's far
too high
the number of deaths have more than
halved in the last fortnight
but 380 deaths were reported each day on
average over the last week
and that is far too high the good news
is
that the link from cases to
hospitalizations
and deaths which has had a grim
inevitability
throughout 2020 that link is now
breaking
thanks to the vaccination program we've
now been able to get the slide up
and this demonstrates as you can see
that there's been a fall in the number
of cases
another fall but that the speed of that
fall
is slowing slightly and this fact
and the fact that the pressure on the
nhs has
lifted somewhat means that the uk chief
medical officers have agreed
that the uk alert level has been moved
down from level five to level four which
is
of course great news but level four
still means that there is significant
pressure on the nhs
the number of cases is now
falling by only
15 percent a week in some areas of the
country
that has flattened entirely and
one in five local authority areas
has seen a rise in cases in the last
week
i'm going to ask professor van tam to
set out more details of this
and the geography in a moment
but i just want to say this about the
figures
this stark picture
shows that this isn't over yet the
stay-at-home rules
are still in place for a reason every
action that you take
every time you put your mask on every
time you stay at home
you are playing your part this is on
all of us to keep this under control
this is still a deadly virus we will get
through this
but we have to stick at it we must all
remain
vigilant and
that brings me to the vaccination
program because while the vaccination
program
is rolling out at the pace of one of the
fastest in the world
we're not there yet we can all take
comfort
that through science we have found a
solution we've got a route
out and we will gradually be able to
replace
the protection that is there in the
restrictions
with protection that comes from the
vaccine and that is very good news
i'm delighted to be able to tell you
that as of this morning
19 million people in this country have
had the vaccine
that's 35 of all adults
across the uk
that also includes over half a million
doses
that were given yesterday and it's easy
for us to get used to these very large
numbers
but that is 19 million people who are
now starting to get the protection that
we know
comes from this jab and we know that the
jabs
are saving lives right now across this
country
and of course the program is expanding
all the time this week we're bringing
10 more major vaccination centers on
stream including town gate theatre in
basildon and reading football club
and i thank everybody who's continuing
this expansion of the vaccination
rollout
and these join our network across the
country in
cinemas and cathedrals in mosques and
museums
and so many other places that have been
converted from whatever they
do normally into these life-saving
centers
right in the heart of our communities
and we've seen this incredible
enthusiasm about coming forwards too
as my colleague derek grieve who heads
up scotland's rollout told her majesty
the queen
he'd like to bottle the community spirit
that we've seen i think we all feel that
and we can see it in the vaccination
program
and i'm very pleased to be able to tell
you that today's
data from the office for national
statistics show
94 of adults saying they've either
received the jab
or they intend to do so that is
staggering
it's really really good news that there
is so much enthusiasm for this jab
and it's testament to colleagues who've
worked so hard to build the
confidence in the jab and make it as
accessible
as possible to people which is what
we're constantly striving to do
i'd like to give a shout out to fazana
hussein
who is a gp in east london who's been
personally
calling each of her priority patients
giving information about the vaccine and
urging them to
to come forward and getting get jabbed i
also want to thank the whole team in
coventry and warwickshire
who have delivered the highest uptake in
the whole country
giving first doses to over 95 percent of
the
over 65s in their area thank you
it's an absolutely spectacular effort
this work is so
important and it's important because
the fight back against this disease
rests with every single one of us
and the more people who are protected
the safer we'll all be
so if you get the call please come
forward to protect yourself
and to protect those around you now
throughout our vaccination program we've
focused on protecting those
at greatest clinical need and this is
the final thing i want to turn to
we offered a vaccine for instance to
everybody in the top four priority
groups
by the 50th of february and our current
target
is to get a first dose offered to
everybody in the top
nine priority groups by the 15th
of april that's everybody who's over 50
or part of an at-risk group earlier this
month i asked the clinicians at the jcvi
to set out what is the best order to
tackle
vac to offer vaccinations for the under
50s
i asked them to make this assessment
based on how we can save
the most lives and prevent the most
hospitalizations earlier today
they published their interim
recommendations
next slide please the jcvi's clinical
advice
is that in order to save most lives
once we've offered the vaccine to
priority groups one to nine
we should take an age-based approach
and invite people to come forward in
three further stages
first people age between 40 and 49 years
old
they will be group 10 then those
30 to 39 and then those who are 18
to 29 who will become group 12.
this is the fastest and simplest way to
roll out the jab
our moral duty is to put saving
lives first and that's what we've done
so i can confirm that we will follow
this clinical advice
we will get jabs into arms as quickly as
we can
in the clinically recommended order and
once we've met the target by the 15th of
april
we'll move on to these priority groups
10 11
and 12. i'm sure that we all agree
that the best approach is the one that
saves the most
lives so that's what we're going to do
together
and while we make this great progress on
vaccines
with one of the fastest rollouts in the
world we've although
still got to hold our nerve and do our
bit it's on all of us still
to stay at home to protect the nhs
and save lives thank you very much i now
want to hand over to professor
van tam to go through those data in more
detail
thank you secretary of state um i'm
afraid i'm going to show you
a couple of um quite sobering slides now
and i'll explain why as we go through
first slide please
so this is a uk map of
case rates and you can see it's a
heat distribution from the darkest
blue um at 250
000 250 cases per 100
000 population per week through to the
lightest colors
where we're getting below 50 cases
per hundred thousand per week and what
you can see
on this slide is that there are still
quite a few areas of the uk that are
burning
quite hot and you can see that
concentration in the midlands
and extending from the east to the west
coast in a broad diagonal belt
you can also see some further hot spots
in
scotland and northern ireland
so this is the first slide i wanted to
show you that
although it is generally good news i'm
afraid
it is better news in some places than it
is in others
and this is not a battle that we have
won yet
next slide please
at least as importantly as the
rates of disease are the rates of
change of disease and these are seven
day
rates of change through the
across the uk again showing colors
from white through to dark purple where
the rate of cases has increased
in the last seven days through to
from white down to dark green areas
where
the rate of change has decreased
and you can see quite clearly if you
look for the purple
and the dark purple spots i'm afraid
there are quite a few of them and that
does show that in some parts of
the uk case rates are changing
albeit slowly but in the wrong direction
this is not a good sign and reinforces
the fact that
i'm afraid this battle at the moment um
is is not one thank you
now i'll just continue if i'm a
secretary of state absolutely with a few
further remarks that relate to the
slides
um i've shown you
as you heard from secretary of state
we have now completed 19 million
first doses of vaccine we've given those
first doses
very successfully to cohorts priority
cohorts one to four
and we're moving at some speed through
cohorts
five to six but these are first doses
people do need a second dose and
given that the totality of the cohorts
one to nine the priority cohorts
is about 30 million people each of whom
need
two doses of vaccine by my rough
calculations
there are something like 40 million
doses still to be given
so much as it's encouraging
and much as i am really very upbeat
about vaccines
and how they are going to change how we
live and and what the disease is like
between now and the summer
there is a long way to go and
my inbox in the in the last week
has been besieged with
people writing in saying i've had the
vaccine
essentially can i now start to break the
rules
can i go and see my grandchildren can i
do x y and z
and and the answer to that is no
we are not yet collectively as a country
in the right place and all the patients
that i vaccinate
and they'll know it if they're listening
on the tv i say to them and remember all
the rules
still apply to all of you and all of us
until we're in a much safer place it
doesn't change
because you've had your first dose of
vaccine and so
you know please don't be tempted to
think
uh well one home visit might be all
right now weather's getting better
going to be a nice weekend one small
gathering
in your house don't really matter i'm
afraid it does and the
the data on the slides speak for
themselves so my kind of key message
tonight
is look this is all going very well but
there are some worry signs
that people are relaxing taking their
foot off the brake
at exactly the wrong time it's a bit
like being three nil up in a game
and thinking well we can't possibly lose
this now but how many times have you
seen the other side take it 4-3
do not wreck this now it is too early to
relax
just continue to maintain discipline and
hang on
just a few more months do not wreck this
now
we are so close thank you secretary of
state
thank you uh professor vantam um and um
for that clear if sobering
assessment we're nearly there let's not
blow it
the first question is from emma from
worthing
what plan do you have for supporting
university students through your roadmap
out of lockdown
thanks very much emma it's an incredibly
important question
and the roadmap sets out some of the
details in terms of the
return of universities to something more
like a normal
university experience and it the answer
to your question depends on the course
that you're studying
and therefore how much you need to be
physically present there's some courses
that have been running throughout
including with of course with covid
secure
arrangements where people need to be in
a
in a lab or a medic medical school for
example
and then there's others um and
especially art subjects
where it is easier to to learn and to
have that over
zoom or video conferencing and so
it there is quite a lot of detail here
and the department for education have
put out a significant amount of
guidance but of course as with
everything else on the roadmap
we've set out the indicative dates but
also we've got to be vigilant on the
data according to the four tests that
the prime minister set out final point
we have today set out the order in which
we're going to vaccinate people
and people who are between 18
and 29 will come in group 12
so it is incredibly important for you to
get your jab when it's your turn as well
because that will help not only to
protect you but to protect
everybody around you as well thanks emma
next question
hannah from belfast why has the
government removed guidance from last
summer
allowing couples in established
relationships not to socially distance
from each other
and what would stop support bubbles
being extended to allow couples to see
each other again without limits on
social contact
well thanks hannah the we took the we
made the change that we did
um to because as we went into the
lockdown over the uh autumn
uh in november and then again at the
start of
uh january we wanted to make sure
that we did everything we possibly could
to stop this from spreading
um and i'm absolutely um
sure that the actions that everybody has
taken and the sacrifices that people
have made
have had that very very positive impact
um we do look of course at the
support bubbles we hold these uh all
these rules
under review and but the purpose of the
support bubbles is
so that people living on their own can
socialize because we know just how
difficult it is to live on your own
uh if you have no contact at all so
that's the reason for
for that support bubble um thanks very
much
hannah next question is from hugh pim at
the bbc
thank you very much secretary of state
the government says it's prioritizing
education in the weeks ahead
what do you say to teachers who argue
that giving them priority for the
vaccine
could help reduce absences and
disruption in classrooms
well thanks hugh the first thing i'd say
is that
we looked at all of these different
considerations and the jcvi looked at
all these different questions including
of course the prioritization according
to different
to different jobs that people have and
but the overall view that we came to
was that the right thing to do the moral
thing to do
is to make sure that we save the most
lives
and the jcvi looked at the clinical
evidence
and also the evidence of how quickly
operationally we can jab
everybody and that means that the
clinical guidance from
the jcvi is very clear that we should
continue through the age
range and we also know from the data
that thankfully teachers are no more
likely to catch covid
than any other member of the population
who goes to work
and so trying to come up with a scheme
which prioritizes one professional group
over another
would have been what would have been
complicated
complicated to put in place and wouldn't
have done what we asked the jcvi to do
which i think is the right thing
which is to make sure that we minimize
the amount of
people who die by using the by using the
vaccine
i don't know whether jvt you've got more
details on this
thanks secretary straight here i could
just add a little bit more
color for you i suppose to say that the
ons data on the occupations with the
highest
rates of death begin with restaurant and
catering establishment managers and
proprietors
follow on to metal working and machine
operatives
food drink and tobacco process
operatives chefs
taxi and cab drivers i won't go on but
um all of those death rates in the
groups i mentioned
are in in excess of uh 100
deaths per 100 000
for males if you look at teachers and
the ons has now
assembled some data on teachers for the
period 9th of march last year
to the 28th of december the figures
for male teachers the figure is 18.4
per 100 000 for mortality
and that compares with an age average
for a comparable age
of 31.4 so if our objective
is to save lives and reduced
hospitalizations
then we have to start in a logical place
and if our objective is to prioritize by
age we would have to by occupation
we would also have to start in a logical
place
and you can see that is going to be very
difficult because
of the multiplicity of occupations that
would need to be called forwards
and doing that is going to damage the
pace
of the vaccine rollout so much and the
big win
actually is in speed so the kind of
message is really
when we're getting down into the into
the
phase two of the vaccine campaigns
it's more important
to be in the queue worry less about
exactly where you are in the queue but
be reassured that the queue is moving
really fast
and that you're going to get to the
front of the queue because it's moving
fast
and that's really um i think the analogy
that i'd
i'd want to kind of paint for you that
being in the queue
is more important than where you are in
it and then making that queue move
really fast
is the key thank you secretary thanks
very much hugh
next question is from liz bates at
channel 4
yes thank you so as she just set out um
quite starkly different areas have very
different
rates of infection it seems that would
suggest
that as we come out of national lockdown
we might see the return of local
lockdowns is that going to happen
um or is that something that you want to
avoid and can i also ask
jvt if we can have a bit more detail um
on what's behind those
regional differences uh thanks very much
liz so
we want to we propose to come out of the
national lockdown all together
these regional disparities are smaller
than we saw
in the autumn and we don't rule out
taking
local action in an individual area if we
see a
spike and i'll ask dr hopkins to say a
bit more about that
but the goal is for us all to come out
together what i want to stress
is that these data show how important it
is that we still stick at it
that this isn't over yet and the fact
that you know
one in five local authority areas across
the country
is seen cases rise in the last week
demonstrates that we all
need to uh to stick to those rules and
to do everything we can
to keep this pandemic under control and
i'll ask dr hopkins to comment on that
and put more detail on
and then jvt to answer your second
question thank you so i think we are
looking into detail of the differences
in the regions
some of the differences that we can see
relates to the occupations and
workplaces that occur
and as you know we have increased
workplace testing with lateral flow
devices
i think it's really important that
people come forward for testing in the
next four weeks
so that it gives us the opportunity to
find those hidden cases in the
communities
and to allow the case rates to come down
over the next four week period
we still have plenty of time in this
time of national restrictions
to reduce the case rates across the
country we'll also be working very
closely with directors of public health
and our regional health protection teams
to ensure that we take local action
right now so we're not waiting for four
weeks time
to see what happens then and that's
happening across the country right now
with engaged teams
looking at how we can find cases contact
trace in those areas and support
people in isolation thanks very much and
jvt
nothing to add secretary of state thank
you thank you liz
thank you uh next question is charlotte
ivers from
talk radio thank you mr hancock we've
had
lots of calls from listeners this week
who are raring to go to get their
vaccines
but they're also a bit concerned and
confused by the government's policy on
vaccine passports are you able to give
them a commitment today that they will
never need
to show a vaccine passport to get into
the pub board
for a football match thanks very much
well
look this is an incredibly important
subject we know that there's some areas
where certification is going to be
needed
for instance if a if a government of
another country
says that you need to show that you've
had a covered vaccine
obviously we then want to be able to
[Music]
help people enable people to be able to
show that certificate
um but the the the wider questions have
all been
um put into a review uh that as you know
michael gove is leading um and i think
it's best to
allow that review to take evidence to
consider all of the broad range of
issues
and and then come to its conclusion i'm
sorry i'm not going to be more specific
than that
i don't want to fetter the discretion of
the of the review and i think it's uh
it's right that we
take our time to think about this thanks
very much and next question is jonathan
riley from the sun
all right good afternoon um to professor
van tam
there are reports today that school
children as young as
five are being told to wear masks in
classrooms
should teachers really be doing this and
is it really a necessity to stop the
spread of covid
and to secretary of state the
kobe crisis has seen an outpouring of
community spirit and volunteerism
including of course the sun's jabs army
campaign
do you think these volunteers should be
recognized in some way and are you going
to
or are there any plans to try and use
this this bank of volunteers
after the pandemic to help our nhs
yes two great questions um the jabs army
marches on
and they're doing an amazing job in
helping everybody to get the vaccines
and
the voluntary effort around the vaccine
rollout has been
unbelievably brilliant the number of
people who've come forward
the enthusiasm that's shown and i'm very
grateful to everybody who's given up
their
time we are looking at a
system of nhs reserves and the idea is
that you have people who are
committed to supporting the nhs through
voluntary
uh action uh through who have the
training for instance and
are on a specific reserves program and
we're piloting that right now but that's
exactly the sort of thing that the
jabs army might might might be called
upon to do
in the future in a broader sense because
we've just seen the
unbelievable support that volunteers can
give to the
nhs when there's a big job to do and
i'll ask
dr hopkins to to respond to your first
question about marks amongst children
thank you so i think the important thing
to
say is that we've looked and reviewed
the data and the evidence on this
school children have the lower amount of
infection especially primary school
children
and in looking at it we've talked to
educationalists public health and
clinical specialists
and the consensus view is very strongly
to not
advise school children a primary school
age to wear
face coverings this for two reasons one
is that they can have difficulties
wearing them and keeping them on all day
and the second part of that is that it's
really important that they can see
facial expressions
in order to develop their communications
and language skills
schools have done a lot of delivered a
lot of measures to reduce the risk in
schools
and additional plans to test our
families of primary school children will
also be in place
as schools go back and therefore the
strong recommendation is for primary
school children not to wear masks
thanks very much anything to add jvt
my perspective on this is more parental
than it is
uh technical and that is to say i just
find it quite a
daunting proposition to try and keep um
face masks on uh
35 year olds in the same room you know i
just think you should be concentrating
on the teaching
thanks very much indeed um the next
question is from ned
simons at the huffington post
uh thank you health secretary um
official figures show there are over
three and a half million nhs sick days
in england due to mental ill health
between march and october last year
um but it's been reported that
healthcare workers won't get a pay rise
in the budget
um what more are you going to do to
support nhs staff other than asking the
public
to clap and uh dr hopkins and professor
van tam
if i may um last year's eat out to help
out scheme was associated with an
increase in transmission
would you be comfortable with it
returning this spring and summer
so on the support for the nhs staff this
is an incredibly
important question and there's a huge
amount of support being put in place
to ensure that staff especially those
who've had
a really tough time in this
second wave of the of the pandemic and
who've had a tough time in many cases
throughout the last year
to ensure that nhs staff get the r
r that they need and of course
employment in the nhs is down to the
individual trust
and there's a huge amount of work going
on to make sure that people get the
support
to deal with traumatic experiences that
they may have had
you know i've supported
in intensive care awards uh during the
pandemic
i i've seen the pressures that nhs staff
are under
i i know i i know from talking to them
um what it feels like and the pressures
that they've been under
both the constancy of the work the
enormous amount of work that's had to be
done
but also the fact that when you are
dealing with people
and the death rate is so high that has a
significant psychological impact so we
are
putting in place that support to make
sure that people get
people on who've been on the front line
in what can be traumatic
situations get the support they need the
professional support they need
as well as the as the hr support they
need
in order to be able to uh to to
have that r r and b uh firing on all
cylinders again
and uh and and get and have that
resilience
um and then when it comes to the second
question uh jvt
yes thanks for the question i mean i'm
going to give quite a
clinical answer really um when you
put people together to um eat and
socialize over a meal
over a table as we all like to do
and maybe a little drink is also
consumed at the same time and the volume
goes up in the in in the place of course
it is likely that there will be some
transmission
but really who pays the bill or how much
of the bill you have to pay for yourself
is
not a medical question and one for
politicians and in particular the
chancellor
thanks very much uh final question is
from jim scott at the northern echo jim
thank you here in the northeast we have
some gp surgeries having to cancel
vaccine clinics because they are not
receiving the supply
that they expected one surgery in our
region can't run clinics until march the
fifth at the earliest because of lack of
supply
we have a huge reviewed rural areas that
rely on gdp surgeries for vaccines
rather than the mass vaccination centers
used in urban areas
why are people in the north still having
to travel more than 40 miles in some
cases to get
to get their dose and is this a sign
that your vaccination strategy has been
designed
for the south uh and just one question
to professor
vantam north yorkshire police are still
giving out hundreds of fines for
lockdown creatures
as people travel to beauty spots in our
region including in some cases
more than 100 miles now that the prime
minister has set out his roadmap out of
lockdown
are you concerned people now think the
end is here and are less likely to stick
to the rules
so jim just on your first question i'll
ask uh dr hopkinskins to come in
but one of the brilliant things about
this vaccination program is how it has
been
equal and fair uk wide and the northeast
has done a
brilliant job in vaccinating it came out
of the blocks really fast
and has done worked absolute wonders and
i
want to thank in particular the
volunteers and the nhs staff
in the north east who have worked so
hard to get these vaccinations
done and the there has been a
lower amount of supply across the whole
uk
in the last week or so you'll have seen
that in
the last 48 hours that has picked up
again and yesterday we did over half a
million jabs again for the first
time in over a week um so that supply is
uh is coming back we all know that it
goes in uh it's lumpy it comes up and
down and we're going to have a bumper
march
um but i do know that there have been
some
uh vaccination centers that are so
efficient they've been able to use all
of their supply
and i'm very very grateful for the work
that they've done but the good news is
that these challenges are faced equally
throughout
the whole of the uk and i get people
from
brilliant local newspapers in the
southwest asking the same question as
you're asking about the
about the northeast and that gives me
the impression
uh that uh the the this challenge of the
rollout is equally balanced
uh as far as i'm concerned every single
person getting their
access to their jab in the northeast is
as
important as in every other part of the
country
and will make sure that the program
delivers uh according to that uh
according to those principles um and um
i uh and i don't know what more i can
say
about my enthusiasm for what the
northeast has done and really really uh
nailed it in this
vaccination program so far um susan yeah
i think that's that's exactly right so
the northeast
has been achieving over and above what
was the rest of the country has done
it's fantastic news everywhere is going
to get vaccine vaccine
and everywhere we'll be able to deliver
the vaccine to all of those from one to
nine
over the coming weeks thanks very much
and on your second question uh jbt
yeah thank you yes is the answer
i do worry that people think it's all
over
the more they think that when it's not
the greater the headwind they're going
to give to the vaccine program
and the more at risk will become
the milestones set
on the roadmap and you know it's just a
collective effort
it is actually up to us whether we can
hold our nerve and see this through
properly
to the end of the road map or
whether we're going to kind of you know
fall at the last furlough
thanks very much and thank you all for
joining the
uh the daily briefing today once again
i'm going to end
um with um where i ended the opening
which is to say that
this is on all of us of course it's on
us at the podium
to do our duty and play our part but
it's on
you as well every single person needs to
keep sticking to those rules
stay at home protect the nhs and save
lives
we're making great strides but we're not
there yet
thank you very much indeed
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest
with bbc news